
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# Open Science and Reproducible Research in R: *An Oxford International Health and Tropical Medicine Lecture Series*

<!-- badges: start -->

[![License for
data](https://img.shields.io/badge/license%20(for%20data)-CC0-blue.svg)](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/)
[![License for
code](https://img.shields.io/badge/license%20(for%20code)-GPL3.0-blue.svg)](https://opensource.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html)
[![License for slide
deck](https://img.shields.io/badge/license%20(for%20slide%20decks)-CC%20BY%204.0-blue.svg))](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
[![pages-build-deployment](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/actions/workflows/pages/pages-build-deployment/badge.svg)](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/actions/workflows/pages/pages-build-deployment)
[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/451333046.svg)](https://zenodo.org/badge/latestdoi/451333046)
<!-- badges: end -->

## Part 1: All about R

[R](https://r-project.org) is a language and environment for statistical
computing and graphics. It is a GNU project which is similar to the S
language and environment which was developed at Bell Laboratories
(formerly AT&T, now Lucent Technologies) by John Chambers and
colleagues. [R](https://r-project.org) can be considered as a different
implementation of S. There are some important differences, but much code
written for S runs unaltered under R.

[R](https://r-project.org) provides a wide variety of statistical
(linear and nonlinear modelling, classical statistical tests,
time-series analysis, classification, clustering, …) and graphical
techniques, and is highly extensible. The S language is often the
vehicle of choice for research in statistical methodology, and R
provides an Open Source route to participation in that activity.

One of [R](https://r-project.org)’s strengths is the ease with which
well-designed publication-quality plots can be produced, including
mathematical symbols and formulae where needed. Great care has been
taken over the defaults for the minor design choices in graphics, but
the user retains full control.

[R](https://r-project.org) is available as Free Software under the terms
of the Free Software Foundation’s GNU General Public License in source
code form. It compiles and runs on a wide variety of UNIX platforms and
similar systems (including FreeBSD and Linux), Windows and MacOS.

[R](https://r-project.org) is unique in that it is not general-purpose.
It does not compromise by trying to do a lot of things. It does a few
things very well, mainly statistical analysis and data visualization.
While you can find data analysis and machine learning libraries for
languages like [Python](https://www.python.org/),
[R](https://r-project.org) has many statistical functionalities built
into its core. No third-party libraries are needed for much of the core
data analysis you can do with the language.

But even with this specific use case, it is used in every industry you
can think of because a modern business runs on data. Using past data,
data scientists and data analysts can determine the health of a business
and give business leaders actionable insights into the future of their
company.

Just because [R](https://r-project.org) is specifically used for
statistical analysis and data visualization doesn’t mean its use is
limited. It’s actually quite popular, ranking 12th in the [TIOBE
index](https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/) of the most popular
programming languages.

Academics, scientists, and researchers use [R](https://r-project.org) to
analyze the results of experiments. In addition, businesses of all sizes
and in every industry use it to extract insights from the increasing
amount of daily data they generate.

### Session 1: Getting the right tools for the job

Using the right tools for the job is critical for success in any
endeavour. In scientific research, specifically with scientific
analysis, R is widely used by researchers from diverse disciplines to
estimate and display results and by teachers of statistics and research
methods. One of the most powerful characteristics of R is that it is
open-source, meaning anyone can access the underlying code used to run
the program and add their own code for free. Along with R, other tools
facilitate/potentiate the benefits of using R.

In this session, we will introduce a basic set of tools that maximises
the effectiveness of R for scientific research. Students will be given a
basic introduction to R, RStudio, and to git and GitHub. The students
will also be guided and facilitated in installing and setting up each of
these tools in the way that is considered best practice for scientific
research purposes.

#### Further Reading

- Installing R and RStudio from Hands-on Programming with R
  (<https://rstudio-education.github.io/hopr/starting.html>)

- Installing git and creating a GitHub account from Happy Git with R
  (<https://happygitwithr.com/install-intro.html>)

#### Teaching Material

Slides can be viewed at
<https://oxford-ihtm.io/open-reproducible-science/session1.html>

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at
<https://oxford-ihtm.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session1-getting-the-right-tools.pdf>

R scripts for slides available
[here](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session1.Rmd)

 

### Session 2: Learning the basics of R - Part 1: R through the user interface of RStudio

In this session, a discussion on the current state of “data” in general
and how this translates to *global health data* specifically. This
discussion will then be linked to how the use of R can facilitate and
support researchers in computing and statistical analysis. The final
part of the session will be focused on a data exercise using R based on
Exercise 1 found in the [Practical R for
Epidemiologists](https://practical-r.org).

#### Further Reading

- Practical R for Epidemiologists - <https://practical-r.org>

#### Teaching Material

Slides can be viewed at
<https://oxford-ihtm.io/open-reproducible-science/session2.html>

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at
<https://oxford-ihtm.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session2-r-basics-part1.pdf>

R scripts for slides available
[here](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session2.Rmd)

 

### Session 3: Learning the basics of R - Part 2: Extending R using packages, creating and manipulating objects

In this session, the students will be introduced to R packages and how
they extend the functionalities of R specifically with regard to
computing and statistical analysis. Students will be taught how to
install and load R packages and be given a background and introduction
to object-oriented programming.

#### Further Reading

- Extending R with packages from Practical R for Epidemiologists
  (<https://practical-r.org/exercise5.html>)

#### Teaching Material

Slides can be viewed at
<https://oxford-ihtm.io/open-reproducible-science/session3.html>

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at
<https://oxford-ihtm.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session3-r-basics-part2.pdf>

R scripts for slides available
[here](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session3.Rmd)

 

### Session 4: Learning the basics of R - Part 3: Creating your own functions

In this session, the students will be introduced to functions in R and
how they can be used to extend the functionalities of R. The students
will be introduced to what functions are and how to create their own
functions for specific computing and statistical analysis tasks that
they require.

#### Further Reading

- Functions in R for Data Science
  (<https://r4ds.had.co.nz/functions.html>)

#### Teaching Material

<!---
Slides can be viewed at https://oxford-ihtm.io/open-reproducible-science/session4.html

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at https://oxford-ihtm.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session4-r-basics-part3.pdf

R scripts for slides available at https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session4.Rmd
--->

 

### Session 5: Creating basic R workflows and literate programming

In this session, the students will be taught and guided through creating
basic R workflows with a focus on using a project-oriented approach in
building scientific analysis workflows. The students will then be
introduced to literate programming in R and the tools, packages, and
techniques used to convert raw code workflows into those that combine
content and data analysis code.

#### Further Reading

- Project-oriented workflow in What they forgot to teach you about R
  (<https://rstats.wtf/project-oriented-workflow.html>)

- Literate programming and RMarkdown from CS5701 Modern Data Book
  (<https://bookdown.org/martin_shepperd/ModernDataBook/C3-Literate.html>)

#### Teaching Material

<!---

Slides can be viewed at https://oxford-ihtm.io/open-reproducible-science/session5.html

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at https://oxford-ihtm.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session5-r-workfloww.pdf

R scripts for slides available at https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session5.Rmd
--->

 

## Part 2: Open and Reproducible Science

Open Science is the practice of science in such a way that others can
collaborate and contribute, where research data, lab notes and other
research processes are freely available, under terms that enable reuse,
redistribution and reproduction of the research and its underlying data
and methods. Reproducible research means that research data and code are
made available so that others are able to reach the same results as are
claimed in scientific outputs. Closely related is the concept of
replicability, the act of repeating a scientific methodology to reach
similar conclusions. These concepts are core elements of empirical
research.

This lecture series is designed to give Oxford IHTM students a
foundational understanding and appreciation of the pillars of Open
Science more broadly and within that the concepts, methods and tools for
Reproducible Research more specifically. To further the students’
learning, practical examples and exercises will be discussed and walked
through using the R language for statistical computing as a way to
practically demonstrate these concepts.

 

### Session 6: Open Science and Reproducible Research in R: An Overview

In this session, an overview of the what, why, and how of Open Science
and Reproducible Research will be discussed to provide the learners with
foundational understanding and appreciation of these concepts and their
applications.

#### Further Reading

Rick, Jessica & Alston, Jesse. (2020). A beginner’s guide to conducting
reproducible research in ecology, evolution, and conservation.
10.32942/osf.io/h5r6n.

#### Teaching Material

Slides can be viewed at
<https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/session6.html>

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at
<https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session6-open-reproducible-science.pdf>

R scripts for slides available
[here](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session6.Rmd)

 

### Session 7: Git and GitHub for use with R: tools for versioning and sharing research

In this session, an overview of git and GitHub will be discussed along
with their integration with R using RStudio. This wil then be followed
by a practical session to guide learners on setting up git and GitHub
onto their personal machines culminating in the learners accessing their
first assignment in GitHub Classroom.

#### Further Reading

Happy Git and GitHub for the useR - <https://happygitwithr.com/>

Perez-Riverol, Y., Gatto, L., Wang, R., Sachsenberg, T., Uszkoreit, J.,
Leprevost, F., Fufezan, C., Ternent, T., Eglen, S. J., Katz, D. S.,
Pollard, T. J., Konovalov, A., Flight, R. M., Blin, K., & Vizcaíno, J.
A. (2016). Ten Simple Rules for Taking Advantage of Git and GitHub. PLoS
computational biology, 12(7), e1004947.
<https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004947>

Blischak JD, Davenport ER, Wilson G (2016) A Quick Introduction to
Version Control with Git and GitHub. PLOS Computational Biology 12(1):
e1004668. <https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004668>

#### Teaching Material

Slides can be viewed at
<https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/session7.html>

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at
<https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session7-git-and-github-with-r.pdf>

R scripts for slides available
[here](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session7.Rmd)

 

### Session 8: Data extraction, transformation, and loading in R

In this session, a discussion on the current state of *“data”* in
general and how this translates to *global health data* specifically.
This discussion will then be linked to how the use of R can facilitate
and support researchers in dealing with *data* in an open and
reproducible way. The final part of the session will be focused on a
data exercise using R based on Exercise 1 found in the [**Practical R
for Epidemiologists**](https://practical-r.org/exercise2.html) book.

#### Further Reading

Practical R for Epidemiologists - <https://practical-r.org>

#### Teaching Material

Slides can be viewed at
<https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/session8.html>

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at
<https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session8-working-with-data-in-r.pdf>

R scripts for slides available
[here](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session8.Rmd)

 

### Session 9: Reproducible scientific workflows in R

In this session, a discussion of best practices on reproducible
scientific workflows and an introduction to using the `{targets}` to
implemenet these workflows. The final part of the session will continue
on the data exercise using R based on Exercise 1 found in the
[**Practical R for
Epidemiologists**](https://practical-r.org/exercise2.html) book.

#### Further Reading

Dynamic Function-Oriented Make-Like Declarative Workflows -
<https://docs.ropensci.org/targets/>

The targets R Package User Manual -
<https://books.ropensci.org/targets/>

#### Teaching Material

<!---
Slides can be viewed at https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/session9.html

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session9-reproducible-scientific-workflows.pdf

R scripts for slides available at https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session9.Rmd
--->

 

### Session 10: Making your R-based research project portable

In this session, a discussion of R code portability, the factors that
impact how the R code/script we develop can be used and run successfully
by someone else, and the currently available solutions to ensuring
portability. The final part of the session will continue on the data
exercise using R based on Exercise 1 found in the [**Practical R for
Epidemiologists**](https://practical-r.org/exercise2.html) book.

#### Further Reading

Introduction to renv -
<https://rstudio.github.io/renv/articles/renv.html>

#### Teaching Material

Slides can be viewed at
<https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/session10.html>

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at
<https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session10-portable-r-projects.pdf>

R scripts for slides available at
<https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session10.Rmd>

 

### Session 11: Automating your R-based research project

In this session, a discussion of automation, its application on R
project workflows, and current available tools for use in automation of
workflows. The final part of the session will continue on the data
exercise using R based on Exercise 1 found in the [**Practical R for
Epidemiologists**](https://practical-r.org/exercise2.html) book.

#### Further Reading

Understanding GitHub Actions -
<https://docs.github.com/en/actions/learn-github-actions/understanding-github-actions>

#### Teaching Material

Slides can be viewed at
<https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/session11.html>

PDF version of slides can be downloaded at
<https://oxfordihtm.github.io/open-reproducible-science/pdf/session11-automating-r-projects.pdf>

R scripts for slides available at
<https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/session11.Rmd>

 

## Series Lecturer

[Ernest Guevarra](https://ernest.guevarra.io)

 

## License

Unless otherwise specified, data used in the code and in the slide decks
in this repository are licensed under a [CC0 1.0
Universal](https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) license.

All code in this repository are licensed under a [GNU General Public
License 3 (GPL-3)](https://opensource.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.html)
license.

All slide decks in this repository are licensed under a [CC BY
4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/) license.

 

## Community guidelines

Feedback, bug reports and feature requests are welcome; file issues
[here](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/issues)
or seek support
[here](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/discussions).
If you would like to contribute to the package, please see our
[contributing
guidelines](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/CONTRIBUTING.md).

Please note that the [Open Reproducible
Science](https://oxfordihtml.github.io/open-reproducible-science)
project is released with a [Contributor Code of
Conduct](https://github.com/OxfordIHTM/open-reproducible-science/blob/main/CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).
By contributing to this project, you agree to abide by its terms.
